Do you agree that it is “astonishing that so little knowledge can give us so much power” (Bertrand Russel) Discuss with reference to the natural sciences and one other AOK? Word count: 1585 Throughout human evolution, practical knowledge has been gathered at every step: we learned how to make fire, wheels, and, eventually, spaceships. By definition, this knowledge has helped humans achieve things they never could before through innovation, so Sir Francis Bacon coined the phrase "knowledge is power," implying that someone with a lot of knowledge is extremely powerful. Bertrand Russel elaborated on this statement by stating that it is "astonishing that so little knowledge can give us so much power," implying that although knowledge is power, the trade between the two is unequal as little can result in so much. In other words, Russel states that knowledge carries more bang for a buck than power, and I agree with this. Little knowledge may give us a large amount of agency because small discoveries can have widespread implications, and little artistic knowledge is needed to use fiction novels as inspiration for inventions that have widespread implications. To clarify, power will be defined as the ability of humans to act–agency– and knowledge will be defined as the theoretical or practical understanding of a subject–an idea. Finally, both the arts and the natural sciences were chosen as AOKs because small pieces of newfound knowledge in both AOKs can compound into paradigm shifts. Scientific discoveries in natural sciences often involve a small amount of knowledge being gained; however, this small amount of knowledge can lead to significant amounts of power in terms of utility through the discovery’s applications, suggesting that little knowledge can give us so much power. For instance, the discovery of CRISPR–a groundbreaking gene editing technology– involved observing how bacteria defended against invading viruses (Ng). However, this observation in and of itself was not of great value; the viruses simply had a protein that altered genes. Yet, the applications of CRISPR have allowed it to be an impactful discovery. For example, it is now used as a gene-editing tool to make pest-resistant crops and cure sickle cell anemia in humans (Ng). Even if it consists of knowing that one specific bacterial enzyme can change DNA, its applications give countries the power to fight against famine. This supports the perspective that power in the natural sciences may lie in real-world applications. An implication of this may be that the natural sciences are similar to mathematics, as even small proofs can often lead to vast real-world applications. Therefore, little knowledge can give us astonishing amounts of power in terms of utility in the natural sciences. A counter argument to this is that new theoretical knowledge in the natural sciences only sometimes leads to real-world applications, suggesting that occasionally little knowledge can give us almost no power. An example is string theory–an area of theoretical physics whose existence physicists heavily debate. There is no decisive settlement for this debate because we do not possess the techniques to test the theory in our paradigm. Therefore, an argument made by those who believe that theoretical pursuits are powerless is that even if we found irrefutable evidence that confirmed string theory, it would not result in gaining new applications or power. There is some merit to this method of argument; we as students have heard this question many times in our lives: "where am I going to use calculus in real life?" Even young children often ask such questions about applications because humanity perceives application as power. Without foreseeable applications for topics like calculus (for high school seniors) and string theory, we choose to believe that purely theoretical concepts do not give us any power. This school of thought implies that knowledge’s application ultimately equates to power, which agrees with the thesis. However, a limitation of this WOK is that it is somewhat naive and shortsighted